Dear Student,Harvard recently rescinded admission offers for some incoming freshmen who participated in a private Facebook group sharing offensive memes. The incident has sparked a lot of discussion: Was Harvard s decision justified? What about the First Amendment? Do young people know the dangers of social media?I m a business school lecturer, career services counselor and former recruiter, and I ve seen how social media becomes part of a person s brand a brand that can help you or hurt you.College admissions staff, future employers and even potential dates are more and more likely to check your profile and make decisions or judgments about you.Here s what you should know so you don t end up like those Harvard prospects.Let s be clear about one thing: You ve been building your online reputation since your first Snapchat. Think the posts disappear? Think private pages are private? Think again.You might feel like your life and opinions are no one s business, but you can t always control who sees what you post. Every photo, video, tweet, like and comment could be screenshotted by your friends (or frenemies). You might make a mistake with your privacy settings or post to the wrong account. And a determined online sleuth can sometimes find ways around privacy settings, viewing photos and posts you might think are well hidden.Your profile will very likely be scrutinized by college admissions officers and employers. According to CareerBuilder s 2017 social media recruitment survey, social media screening is through the roof:This trend is common with admissions as well. Kaplan Test Prep s 2017 survey of over 350 college admissions officers found that 35 percent checked applicants social media profiles. Many who do said social media has influenced their admission decisions.So what are the potential hazards to avoid? These are some of the types of posts that left a bad impression on me when I used to recruit: Remember, social media is not all bad; in many cases it helps recruiters get a good feel for your personality and potential fit. The CareerBuilder survey found 44 percent of employers who screened candidates via social networks found positive information that caused them to hire a candidate.From my experience, the following information can support and confirm a candidate s resume: Research. Both the college of your dreams and your future employer could Google you, so you should do the same thing. Also check all of your social media profiles even the ones you haven t used for a while and get rid of anything that could send the wrong message. Remember, things can t be unseen. Bottom line: Would you want a future boss, admissions officer, or blind date to read or see it? If not, don t post it. If you already have, delete it.Sincerely,Your Career Counselor