The meaning of Brexit is once again open to question. Theresa May s failed election gamble appears to have done away with her mandate for a hard Brexit. She had previously committed to leaving the EU s single market and customs union. That means a number of trade options appear to be back on the table.Since the referendum on Britain s EU membership was called, The Conversation has published a series of articles analysing what the UK s future relationship with the EU might look like. For those who are short on time, here s a summary of the four models for UK trade after Brexit by trade expert Maria Garcia from the University of Bath. They are Switzerland, Norway, WTO-only and Canada, which recently signed a comprehensive trade deal with the EU known as CETA. None offer a smooth road ahead, as our academic experts explain below.Negotiating CETA was a rollercoaster writes the University of Liverpool s Andrew Smith, an expert in Canadian trade. It offers a lesson for the UK in negotiating a free-trade agreement with the EU and makes it clear that the process will be long and difficult.So what about the Swiss model of cooperation with the EU? Switzerland is not a member of the single market. Instead it has a number of bilateral deals with the EU. The University of Kent s Clive Church explains why it makes for a complex and messy model, again featuring endless negotiations.Norway offers a model of what it s like to remain in the single market, but not be in the EU. This article by Newcastle University s Francesco De-Cecco points out that a Norway-style arrangement comes with a democratic deficit. It would not mean taking back control , as it means accepting freedom of movement and laws of the market that are made in Brussels. Meanwhile, research by Nauro Campos at Brunel University finds that Norway s economy would have done better if it had political, as well as economic, membership of the EU.The alternative to these models is the WTO-only arrangement. If the UK leaves the EU without concluding a trade deal, it will be treated the same as any of the 164 WTO members. This means tariffs on trade and the full gamut of non-tariff barriers. For QUB s Billy Melo Araujo it is the nightmare scenario.